Illustrate object lifecycles (#655)
ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap: draft-ietf-ppm-dap.md

replay window. This allows implementation to save resources by forgetting old
report IDs.

## Lifecycle of Protocol Objects

The following diagram illustrates how the various objects in the protocol are
constructed or transformed into other protocol objects. Nodes enclosed in an
oval are verbs or actions which process, transform or combine one or more
objects into one or more other objects. Note that this does not necessarily
illustrate how participants communicate. In particular, the processing of
aggregation jobs happens in distinct, non-colluding parties.

~~~ aasvg
                   measurement
                        |
                    .---+---.

>                    | sharded |

Reviewer: s/sharded/shard/g

Likewise below.

Author: Fixed everywhere that I can see

  |       Leader     Helper report    public  |         |        |       |
  |     report share 1  share 1      share 1  |         |        |       |
  |          |            |             |     |         |        |       |
  |     .----+----.  .----+----.        |     |         |        |       |
  |    | decrypted || decrypted |       |     |         |        |       |
  |     '----+----'  '----+----'        |  .--+---------+---.    |       |
  |          |            |             | | reports prepared |   |       |
  |          v            v             |  '--+---------+---'    |       |
  |    Leader input   Helper input      |     |         |   .----+-------+---.
  |       share 1      share 1          |     |         |  | aggregation jobs |
  |          |            |             |     |         |  |       run        |
  '--------->+----------->|             |     |         |   '----+-------+---'
             |<-----------+<------------'     |         |        |       |
             |            |                   |         |        |       |
         .---+------------+----.              |         |        |       |

>         | input shares prepared |             v         |        |       |

Reviewer: What's the difference between "reports prepared" and "input shares prepared"?

Reviewer: I think I was missing, and what's not clear, is that we're "zooming in" on a part of the pipeline. Perhaps we should split out the zoomed-in part to its own figure?

Author: Actually, I'm going to try one more thing that might make this more clear. It'll take a while, though.

Author: OK, I reworked the diagram so that we illustrate the preparation of multiple reports, and then the running of multiple aggregation jobs, as stacks of boxes. Hopefully this makes it clear that all reports are handled the same way while being reasonably compact.

I'm trying to optimize for vertical space so that readers don't have to scroll too much when they look at this, but I'm open to using more room in exchange for greater clarity.

             |            |<-------------------------------' .-----+-----.
                                                             |           |
            ...          ...                          Leader batch  Helper batch
                                                        bucket j      bucket j
             |            |                                  |           |
             |<-----------|----------------------------------'           |
             |            |<---------------------------------------------'
             |<-----------+<----- query chosen
             |            |       by Collector
         .---+------------+---.
        | batch buckets merged |
         '---+------------+---'
             |            |
             v            v
   Leader aggregate  Helper aggregate
          share         share
             |            |
             '------+-----'
                    |
               .----+----.
              | unsharded |
               '----+----'
                    |
                    v
             aggregate result
~~~
{: #object-lifecycle title="Lifecycles of protocol objects" }

### Arity of Protocol Objects

> DAP reports are 1:1 to with measurements. In this illustration, `i` distinct

Reviewer: Likewise below
```suggestion
DAP reports are 1-to-1 to with measurements. In this illustration, `i` distinct
```

Clients upload a distinct report, but a single Client could upload multiple
reports to a task (see {{sybil}} for some implications of this). The process of

> sharding measurements, constructing reports and uploading them is discussed in
> detail in {{upload-flow}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sharding measurements, constructing reports and uploading them is specified in {{upload-flow}}.
```

Reports are many:1 with aggregation jobs. The Leader assigns each of the `i`
reports into one of `j` different aggregation jobs, which can be run in parallel

> by the Aggregators. Each aggregation job contains `k` report shares. `k` is

Reviewer: ?
```suggestion
by the Aggregators. Each aggregation job contains `k` reports. `k` is
```

roughly `i / j`, but it is not necessary for aggregation jobs to have uniform
size. See {{operational-capabilities}} for some discussion of performance
implications for aggregation job scheduling strategies.

Report shares, input shares and output shares have a 1:1:1 relationship. Report
shares are decrypted into input shares and then prepared into output shares. The
scheduling of aggregation jobs and their execution by the Aggregators is
discussed in detail in {{aggregate-flow}}.

Output shares are accumulated into batch buckets, and so have a many:1
relationship. In this example, we show one batch bucket for each aggregation
job, but aggregation jobs and batch buckets are not necessarily 1:1. Multiple
aggregation jobs could contribute to the same batch bucket, and a single
aggregation job could contribute to multiple batch buckets. The assignation of

> output shares to batch buckets is an implementation detail of each Aggregator.

Reviewer: I'm wondering to what extent this is true. The batch mode defines an infinite sequence of non-overlapping batch buckets. I suppose the aggregators could sub-divide these further if they wanted to. Is that what you mean?

Reviewer: I'm not following. My understanding of "batch bucket" as we define it in the spec:

1. time_interval: [0, t), [t, 2*t), [2*t, 3*t), ..., where t is short for time_precision
2. leader_selected: batch_id.

At aggregation time, the aggregator always knows which batch bucket a report belongs to.

Author: You are correct. I hadn't noticed we'd defined batch buckets that rigorously in [4.8.2.3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-14#section-4.8.2.3), [5.1.4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-14#section-5.1.4) and [5.2.4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-14#section-5.2.4). Thanks for pointing that out. I fixed this text to refer to `{{batch-buckets}}`.

║  ║ |    prepare input shares    |<---║---║-------║-------|       ║   ║       ║
║  ║  '---+-------------+--------'     ║   ║       ║       |       ║   ║       ║
║  ║      |             |              ║   ║       ║       |       ║   ║       ║
║  ║      v             v              ║   ║<------║-------|       ║   ║       ║
║  ║  Leader output   Helper output    ║   ║       ║       |       ║   ║       ║
║  ║    share 1         share 1        ║   ║       ║      ...      ║   ║       ║
║  +=======|===============|===========+   ║       ║               ║   ║       ║
║    ║     | Leader output | Helper output ║       ║       |       ║   ║       ║
║    ║     | share 2       | share 2       ║       ║<------'       ║   ║       ║
║    +=====|=|=============|=|=============+       ║               ║   ║       ║
║      ... | |  Leader     | | Helper              ║               ║   ║       ║
║          | |  output     | | output              ║               ║   ║       ║
║       ║  | |  share k    | | share k             ║               ║   ║       ║
║       +==|=|=====|=======|=|=====|===============+               ║   ║       ║

> ║          v v ... v       v v ... v                               ║   ║       ║

Author: I had to use a bit more vertical space to make this work but I think it's worth it.

║  Leader batch                    Helper batch                    ║   ║       ║
║    bucket 1                        bucket 1                      ║   ║       ║
+=======|===============================|==========================+   ║       ║
  ║     | Leader batch                  | Helper batch                 ║       ║
  ║     |   bucket 2                    |  bucket 2                    ║       ║
  +=====|========|======================|=====|========================+       ║
   ...  | .------'                      | .---'                                ║
        | |  Leader batch               | |  Helper batch                      ║
    ║   | |    bucket j                 | |    bucket j                        ║
    +===|=|=====|=======================|=|=====|==============================+
        v v ... v      query chosen     v v ... v
     .--+-+-----+--.   by collector  .--+-+-----+--.
    |  merge leader |       |       | merge helper  |
    | batch buckets |<------+------>| batch buckets |
     '------+------'                 '------+------'
            |                               |

>             '---------------+---------------'

Reviewer: Perhaps we should show aggregate shares as intermediate values here.

Author: Oops, you're absolutely right. Those got lost when I reorganized the diagram.
